The term “atherosclerosis”
refers to the build up of
fatty, waxy deposits called plaque in arteries.
The arteries are the blood vessels that
carry blood containing
oxygen throughout the body.
If the build up of plaque is large enough,
blood flow can be reduced.
If the plaque breaks off or ruptures,
a blood clot forms.
It can completely block the artery
or travel to another part of the body.
Most people think about atherosclerosis
in relation to the heart.
Reduced blood flow in the coronary arteries
can cause symptoms like chest pain and fatigue
and blocked blood flow results in a heart attack.
But atherosclerosis is a systemic disease
and the same process can occur in
any artery in the body.
Build up of plaque in the carotid arteries,
which supply blood to the brain,
can result in a stroke.
Atherosclerosis in the major arteries
supplying blood to the arms, legs, and pelvis
can result in peripheral arterial disease.
Blockage of the renal arteries,
which supply the kidneys,
can result in kidney failure.
Many scientists believe atherosclerosis
begins with damage to the endothelium
the inner most wall of the artery.
Preventing and treating atherosclerosis
includes addressing factors that
promote this damage,
including cigarette smoking,
high blood pressure,
high cholesterol levels, and diabetes.